.TH AUFS\-N 8 "2026-05-06" "pfs-utils-cli" "PuppyRus PFS Module Tools"
.SH NAME
aufs\-n \- list AUFS layers of the running root filesystem
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B aufs\-n
.br
.B aufs\-n
\fIN\fR
.br
.B aufs\-n
.B \-\-raw
[\fIFORMAT\fR]
[\fB\-\-reverse\fR]
[\fB\-\-hidetop\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B aufs\-n
reads the AUFS branch list from
.I /sys/fs/aufs/si_*/br*
and displays information about each layer of the running root AUFS.
.PP
In human-readable mode (default) it prints a formatted table showing the layer
number, bundle mount point, layer permissions, source path, and bundle
permissions.
.PP
When a numeric argument
.I N
is given,
.B aufs\-n
prints only the mount point of layer
.IR N .
.PP
In raw mode
.RB ( \-\-raw )
it prints one line per layer using a user-defined format string.
This is the primary interface used by
.BR pfsfind (8),
.BR chroot2pfs (8),
and other tools that need to enumerate layers programmatically.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\-raw " " [\fIFORMAT\fR]
Print raw output, one line per layer.
.I FORMAT
is a shell-style string that may reference the following variables:
.RS
.TP
.B $n
Layer number (zero-padded).
.TP
.B $bundle
Bundle mount point.
.TP
.B $bname_bundle
Basename of the bundle mount point.
.TP
.B $dname_bundle
Directory part of the bundle mount point.
.TP
.B $source
Source of the layer (module file, image, directory, or
.BR tmpfs ).
.TP
.B $bname_source
Basename of the source.
.TP
.B $dname_source
Directory part of the source.
.TP
.B $layer_perm
AUFS layer permissions
.RB ( ro " or " rw ).
.TP
.B $bundle_perm
Bundle mount permissions
.RB ( ro " or " rw ).
.RE
.PP
Default format when
.B \-\-raw
is given without a
.I FORMAT
argument:
.RS
.nf
$n $bundle $layer_perm $source $bundle_perm
.fi
.RE
.TP
.B \-\-reverse
List layers in reverse order (bottom to top).
.TP
.B \-\-hidetop
Skip the topmost (rw) layer.
Useful when enumerating read-only module layers.
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Show all layers in human-readable format:
.RS
.nf
aufs\-n
.fi
.RE
.PP
Get the mount point of layer 3:
.RS
.nf
aufs\-n 3
.fi
.RE
.PP
List all bundle mount points:
.RS
.nf
aufs\-n \-\-raw '$bundle'
.fi
.RE
.PP
List layers bottom-to-top, skipping the rw top layer:
.RS
.nf
aufs\-n \-\-raw \-\-reverse \-\-hidetop '$bname_source $bundle'
.fi
.RE
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /sys/fs/aufs/si_*/br*
AUFS branch information read by this utility.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR pfsfind (8),
.BR pfsload (8),
.BR pfsunload (8),
.BR pfs\-utils (8)
.SH AUTHORS
PuppyRus pfs-utils maintainers.
