.TH CHROOT2PFS 8 "2026-05-06" "pfs-utils-cli" "PuppyRus PFS Module Tools"
.SH NAME
chroot2pfs \- build a .pfs module by running a command inside a chroot or nspawn container
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B chroot2pfs
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]
[\fB\-\-command\fR \fICOMMAND\fR]
.br
.B chroot2pfs
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]
\fIMODULE.pfs\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B chroot2pfs
assembles a layered root from existing
.B .pfs
modules (or the running system's AUFS layers), executes a command or script
inside that environment, then captures the resulting filesystem changes into a
new
.B .pfs
module or directory.
.PP
The default layering backend is
.B OverlayFS
(\fB\-\-overlay\fR).
Pass
.B \-\-aufs
to use AUFS instead.
.PP
When
.I NAME
is given without a
.B .pfs
suffix, the output is a plain directory.
When
.I NAME
ends with
.BR .pfs ,
the changes are compressed into a squashfs module.
.PP
Passing an existing
.B .pfs
module as the sole positional argument triggers
.I rebuild mode:
the module is extracted, its embedded build metadata is replayed, and a fresh
module is produced.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-n ", " \-o ", " \-\-name " " \fINAME\fR
Output name.
If
.I NAME
has no
.B .pfs
suffix, a directory is created.
If omitted,
.B chroot2pfs
prompts interactively.
.TP
.B \-\-overlay
Use OverlayFS for the chroot root layer (default).
.TP
.B \-\-aufs
Use AUFS instead of OverlayFS for the chroot root layer.
.TP
.BR \-m ", " \-\-mask " " \fIPATTERN\fR
Filter system AUFS bundles by
.I PATTERN
to build the chroot base.
.TP
.B \-\-mlist " " \fILIST\fR
Comma-separated list of modules and directories to use as the chroot base.
Prefix an entry with
.B #
to exclude it.
.TP
.B \-\-flist " " \fIFILE\fR
Read the module list from
.IR FILE .
Lines starting with
.B #
are excluded.
.TP
.BR \-c ", " \-\-contaner " " \fITYPE\fR
Container type:
.B chroot
(default) or
.B nspawn
(requires
.BR systemd\-nspawn (1)
on both host and guest).
.TP
.B \-\-boot
Pass
.B \-b
to
.BR systemd\-nspawn (1).
Only valid with
.BR \-c " " nspawn .
.TP
.B \-\-command " " \fICOMMAND\fR
Command to execute inside the container.
Must be the last option on the command line.
.TP
.BR \-s ", " \-\-script " " \fISCRIPT\fR
Copy
.I SCRIPT
into the container and execute it there.
.TP
.B \-\-bind " " \fILIST\fR
Comma-separated bind mounts in the form
.IR /HOST/DIR :: /GUEST/DIR .
.TP
.B \-X
Allow the container to connect to the current GUI session.
For X11 this grants local access with
.BR xhost (1)
and binds
.IR /tmp/.X11-unix .
For Wayland it binds the caller runtime directory
.IR /run/user/$UID
and propagates
.BR WAYLAND_DISPLAY ,
.BR XDG_RUNTIME_DIR ,
and related toolkit variables.
Recommended with
.BR \-c " " nspawn .
.PP
Interactive shells opened by
.B chroot2pfs
use a blue-background prompt marker inside both
.B chroot
and
.B nspawn
containers. This is only a shell prompt marker; it does not depend on nspawn.
.TP
.B \-\-nomod
Run the command but do not create an output module.
.TP
.BR \-f ", " \-\-fast
Use a faster compression algorithm for the output module.
.TP
.B \-\-notrim
Skip the default
.BR trim-chroot (8)
pass. Without this option,
.B chroot2pfs
removes disposable paths such as logs, runtime directories and package caches
from the captured changes before creating the output directory or module.
.TP
.BR \-w ", " \-\-wh
Preserve AUFS whiteout files in the output.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Print usage and exit.
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Install a package into a module directory:
.RS
.nf
chroot2pfs \-o ModuleDIR \-\-flist /tmp/module.list \-\-command apt install mc
.fi
.RE
.PP
Run a GUI application from a guest system without creating a module. Use
.B \-X
for X11/Wayland socket propagation:
.RS
.nf
chroot2pfs \-\-nomod \-X \-c chroot \-\-mlist /path/1.pfs,3.pfs \-\-command pcmanfm
.fi
.RE
.PP
Rebuild an existing module:
.RS
.nf
chroot2pfs myapp.pfs
.fi
.RE
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
Module rebuild error or wrong module type.
.TP
.B 2
Overlay/AUFS mount error.
.TP
.B 3
Root mount error.
.TP
.B 4
A layer file does not exist.
.TP
.B 5
Cannot insert layer.
.TP
.B 6
Output file or directory already exists.
.PP
Other non-zero codes are propagated from the container command.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B PFS_LAYERING
When set to
.B aufs
or
.BR overlay ,
overrides automatic layering detection.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /var/lib/chroot2pfs/<name>/cmdline
Build metadata saved inside the module for later rebuild.
.TP
.I /var/lib/chroot2pfs/<name>/date
Timestamp of the build.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR mkpfs (8),
.BR pfs (8),
.BR pfsload (8),
.BR pfsunload (8),
.BR pfs\-utils (8),
.BR systemd\-nspawn (1)
.SH AUTHORS
PuppyRus pfs-utils maintainers.
Originally by Alexandr Betkher (betcher), magos-linux.ru.
