.TH MKPFS\-EROFS 8 "2026-05-06" "pfs-utils5" "PuppyRus PFS Module Tools"
.SH NAME
mkpfs\-erofs \- create a .pfs module image using the erofs filesystem
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B mkpfs\-erofs
[\fB\-o\fR \fIOUT.pfs\fR]
[\fImkfs.erofs\-options\fR...]
\fISOURCE_DIR\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B mkpfs\-erofs
is a thin wrapper around
.BR mkfs.erofs (1)
that creates a
.B .pfs
module image using the erofs filesystem format instead of squashfs.
.PP
erofs modules load faster than squashfs on most hardware because erofs uses
page-aligned blocks and supports random access without decompressing entire
blocks.
The trade-off is a slightly larger on-disk size for highly compressible content.
.PP
If no compression option
.RB ( \-z )
is supplied,
.B mkpfs\-erofs
prepends
.B \-zlz4hc
by default.
All other arguments are passed through to
.BR mkfs.erofs (1)
unchanged.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-o ", " \-\-out\-file " " \fIPATH\fR
Output image path.
Defaults to
.RI ./ <source>.pfs
when omitted.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Print usage and exit.
.PP
All other options are passed directly to
.BR mkfs.erofs (1).
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Build a module with default lz4hc compression:
.RS
.nf
mkpfs\-erofs ./myapp\-root
.fi
.RE
.PP
Build with explicit output path:
.RS
.nf
mkpfs\-erofs \-o myapp.pfs ./myapp\-root
.fi
.RE
.PP
Build with lzma compression:
.RS
.nf
mkpfs\-erofs \-zlzma ./myapp\-root
.fi
.RE
.PP
Build with multiple threads:
.RS
.nf
mkpfs\-erofs \-\-threads=4 ./myapp\-root
.fi
.RE
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
Missing
.I SOURCE_DIR
or invalid option.
.TP
.B 127
.B mkfs.erofs
not found in PATH.
.PP
Other codes propagate from
.BR mkfs.erofs (1).
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR mkpfs (8),
.BR pfsbench (8),
.BR pfsload (8),
.BR pfs\-utils (8),
.BR mkfs.erofs (1)
.SH AUTHORS
PuppyRus pfs-utils maintainers.
