.TH MKPFS 8 "2026-05-06" "pfs-utils-cli" "PuppyRus PFS Module Tools"
.SH NAME
mkpfs \- create or merge .pfs squashfs modules
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B mkpfs
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]
\fISOURCE\fR...
[\fB\-o\fR \fIOUT.pfs\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B mkpfs
builds a squashfs-based
.B .pfs
module from one or more source directories or existing
.B .pfs
files. Existing erofs modules are accepted as input when the kernel supports
erofs; new erofs modules are created with
.BR mkpfs\-erofs (8).
When given a single directory it compresses it directly into a module.
When given multiple sources it merges them via the selected layering backend
(AUFS or OverlayFS) before compressing, so the result is a single container
module.
.PP
If the output path has no
.B .pfs
suffix,
.B mkpfs
writes a plain directory instead of a compressed image.
This is useful for inspecting the merged tree before committing to a module.
.PP
Whitespace in any argument is rejected with exit code 2; rename files before
passing them to
.BR mkpfs .
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-o ", " \-\-out\-file " " \fIOUT\fR
Output file or directory path.
Defaults to
.I ./<first-source>.pfs
when omitted.
If
.I OUT
has no
.B .pfs
extension the result is a directory.
.TP
.BR \-d ", " \-D
Expand the next argument as a directory alias:
.B mkpfs \-d DIR
is equivalent to passing every immediate subdirectory of
.I DIR
as a separate source.
.TP
.BR \-m ", " \-M
Expand the next argument as a module alias:
.B mkpfs \-m DIR
is equivalent to passing every
.B .pfs
file found directly inside
.I DIR
as a separate source.
.TP
.BR \-l ", " \-\-local
Build in-place without AUFS or OverlayFS.
Useful when only one source directory has to be compressed.
.TP
.BR \-f ", " \-\-fast ", " \-g
Use a faster (but larger) compression algorithm.
Defaults to
.B gzip
when the
.B pfs
library does not define a faster preset.
.TP
.B \-\-mklist
Embed a file list (pfs.files) into the module for package tracking.
.TP
.B \-\-mksqfs " " \fIPARAMS\fR
Pass
.I PARAMS
verbatim to
.BR mksquashfs (1).
This option must appear last on the command line.
.TP
.BR \-q ", " \-\-quiet
Suppress progress output.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-progress
Suppress the
.B mksquashfs
progress bar.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Print usage and exit.
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Build a module from a directory:
.RS
.nf
mkpfs ./myapp
.fi
.RE
.PP
Merge two modules into one container:
.RS
.nf
mkpfs base.pfs extras.pfs \-o combined.pfs
.fi
.RE
.PP
Merge all modules in a directory:
.RS
.nf
mkpfs \-m /srv/modules \-o all.pfs
.fi
.RE
.PP
Build with custom mksquashfs options (xz, 1 MB blocks):
.RS
.nf
mkpfs ./myapp \-\-mksqfs \-comp xz \-b 1M
.fi
.RE
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
No source specified or source directory is empty.
.TP
.B 2
Whitespace detected in an argument, or mksquashfs error.
.TP
.B 3
Merge root mount error.
.TP
.B 5
Cannot insert layer into the merge root.
.TP
.B 6
Output directory already exists.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B PFS_LAYERING
When set to
.B aufs
or
.BR overlay ,
overrides automatic layering detection.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /usr/bin/pfs
Library sourced at startup; provides
.BR mkaufs ,
.BR mkoverlay_chroot ,
.BR addlayer_dispatch ,
.BR mksqmod ,
and other helpers.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR mkpfs\-erofs (8),
.BR pfsload (8),
.BR pfsunload (8),
.BR pfsextract (8),
.BR pfsrebuild (8),
.BR pfs\-utils (8),
.BR mksquashfs (1)
.SH AUTHORS
PuppyRus pfs-utils maintainers.
