.TH pfs-utils 8  "marсh, 2017" "version 3.*" "PFS-UTILS"
.SH NAME
pfs-utils \- scripts kit to manage squashfs modules for live linux distributions 
.SH DESCRIPTION
Scripts collection to create, merge, extract and load/unload pfs modules
.TP
\- mkpfs \- create and merge modules
.TP
\- pfsextraxt \- extract packages from module, install packages 
.TP
\- pfsload \- AUFS-only: insert modules (dirs, images) to root file system
.TP
\- pfsunload \- AUFS-only: remove modules from root file system
.TP
\- pfsuninstall \- remove package files from system
.TP
\- pfsrebuild \- AUFS-only for loaded-module runtime rebuilds; installed/offline registry rebuilds are separate
.TP
\- sync2layer \- create layer and move changes from top RW layer to new
.TP
\- pfsinfo \- list packsges in module
.TP
\- pfs \- pfs-utils scripts library 

.SH V5 NEW VERBS
Library functions added for v5 behavior are implemented in the
\fBpfs\fR library and used by the runtime wrappers.

.SS pfs _detect_initrd
.B pfs _detect_initrd
Detects current initrd/boot stack.

.TP
Usage
.BI "pfs _detect_initrd"

.TP
Output (exactly one line)
The function prints one of:

.TP
.B rootaufs2
- rootaufs2-style AUFS stack
.TP
.B uird
- UIRD stack
.TP
.B livekit
- livekit stack
.TP
.B porteus
- Porteus stack
.TP
.B unknown
- fallback when no markers match

.TP
Return
.RS
.I 0
on success.
.RE

.TP
Notes
The detection logic is internal and may change only as documented by implementation
changes.

.SS pfs addlayer_dispatch
.B pfs addlayer_dispatch
Dispatch helper for internal AUFS layer insertion and OverlayFS private-namespace setup. It does not make OverlayFS support system-wide hot attach or detach.

.TP
Usage
.BI "pfs addlayer_dispatch " FILE " [SESSION]"

If only one argument is passed, it is treated as
.B FILE
and session defaults to
.B 0
.

.TP
Layering selection
.TP
.B PFS_LAYERING
When set to
.BR aufs " or " overlay , it is used directly.
.TP
Unset
Calls
.B _detect_initrd
and maps
.BR uird / livekit " to overlay, " rootaufs2 / porteus / unknown " to aufs.

.TP
Return values
.TP
.I 0
on success, writes the created layer mount path
.TP
.I 8
for unknown layering mode
.TP
Other exit codes
propagated from underlying
.B addlayer_aufs
or private OverlayFS namespace setup.
.PP
AUFS-only: system-wide hot attach/detach is not supported on OverlayFS roots;
use
.BR pfsrun (8)
for OverlayFS runtime execution.

.SS mkpfs-erofs
.B mkpfs-erofs
Create an EROFS module image.

.TP
Usage
.BI "mkpfs-erofs [OPTIONS] SOURCE_DIR"

.TP
Options
.TP
.B -o, --out-file PATH
Output image path. Default is
.B ./<source>.pfs
.TP
.B -h, --help
Print help and exit.
.TP
Additional args
All extra args are passed to
.B mkfs.erofs
unchanged.

.TP
Compression
If no compression option is supplied, the wrapper prepends
.B -zlz4hc
by default.

.TP
Examples
.RS
.nf
mkpfs-erofs ./busybox-rootfs
mkpfs-erofs --out-file busybox.pfs ./busybox-rootfs
mkpfs-erofs --threads=4 ./busybox-rootfs
.fi
.RE

.TP
Exit status
Returns wrapper usage errors as
.B 1
when arguments are missing or invalid, and
.B 127
when
.B mkfs.erofs
is not available; otherwise returns underlying
.B mkfs.erofs
status.

.SH ADDITIONAL TOOLS
The following tools are included in pfs-utils and complement the core load/unload workflow.
.PP
.B pfsrun
\(em primary user-facing launcher for OverlayFS runtime execution. It runs an application inside a private mount namespace with a .pfs module overlaid on the system root.
Use this on overlay-root systems where AUFS dynamic-add is unavailable and per-process isolation is acceptable.
.PP
.B pfsexec
\(em lower-level overlay namespace helper used by
.BR pfsrun (8) .
Auto-detects the main binary from the module name, drops privileges to the
invoking user, binds
.IR /proc , /sys , /dev , /run/user/$UID , /tmp/.X11-unix , /run/dbus
and the user's
.B $HOME
into the namespace, and propagates Wayland/X11 environment.
Falls back to an interactive shell when auto-detection fails.
See
.BR pfsrun (8).
.PP
.B pfsactivate / pfsdeactivate
\(em opt-in symlink-injection methodology (Porteus neko's pattern). Loop-mounts a module
read-only and creates symlinks system-wide for every file in it. Reversible via
.BR pfsdeactivate (8).
EXPERIMENTAL: symlinks are not transparent (O_NOFOLLOW, st_dev); on aufs-root prefer
.BR pfsload (8)
for kernel-level transparency.
.SH MOUNT INDEX LAYOUT
The canonical v5 mount index is stored under
.BR /var/lib/pfs/mount/<container-module>/<submodule>/ .
Each index directory contains
.BR pfs.files ,
.BR pfs.dirs.empty ,
.BR pfs.specs ,
and may contain
.BR pfs.depends .
.PP
The stable identity tuple is
.BR "(container-module, submodule)" .
Display and lookup use the qualified
.B container:submodule
form when the container is known. Single-module indexes use the default
.B <module>/<module>
identity.
.PP
Duplicate submodule names across containers are valid. In that case callers must use
.B container:submodule
and an unqualified duplicate must fail as ambiguous. It must not select an arbitrary match.
.PP
The v4 compatibility mirror remains
.BR /etc/packages/mount/<submodule>/ .
This flat path is a fallback for old indexes and consumers. It cannot safely disambiguate duplicate names because it has no container component.
.PP
Current lookup tools read canonical indexes first and keep the legacy fallback. New metadata should be written to the canonical two-level layout and mirrored only for compatibility.
.PP
.B pfsmigrate-mount
copies legacy flat mount indexes from
.BR /etc/packages/mount/<submodule>/
into
.BR /var/lib/pfs/mount/legacy/<submodule>/ .
Migrated entries use
.B legacy:<submodule>
provenance. The command keeps legacy source directories for fallback readers, is idempotent when destination content matches, and reports a non-destructive conflict when destination content differs. Legacy flat paths still cannot disambiguate duplicate submodule names and must not become the canonical source of truth.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B PFS_LAYERING
If set to
.B aufs
or
.B overlay
it overrides layering auto-detection and forces addlayer dispatch mode.
The overlay value is for private namespace setup and build-time helpers; it does not enable system-wide hot attach or detach on OverlayFS roots.
When unset, initrd-based detection is used.

.SH DEPRECATION
.TP
.B addlayer
The legacy direct
.B addlayer
function is retained for compatibility and now delegates to
.B addlayer_dispatch
.

.TP
Warning behavior
A warning is written to stderr one time per caller name when
.B addlayer
is used directly.

.B Message:
.RS
.nf
pfs-utils: DEPRECATED: direct addlayer() call from <caller>. Use addlayer_dispatch(). See pfs-utils.8.
.fi
.RE

.TP
Record file
If
.B XDG_RUNTIME_DIR
is set and writable, warning state is tracked in
.B $XDG_RUNTIME_DIR/pfs-utils.deprecations
; otherwise the warning is always printed for each direct call.

.SH V4 SIBLINGS
Compatibility wrappers are installed for explicit rollback to v4 behavior.
.TP
.B pfsload-v4
Run legacy v4-compatible load logic.
.TP
.B pfsunload-v4
Run legacy v4-compatible unload logic.

.TP
Current package status
No versioned
.B pfs-v4
library wrapper is present in this snapshot.

.SH EXIT STATUS
all utils returns a zero exit status if the job finished susfull.
.SH AUTHOR
forum.puppyrus.org team (sfs, zay, DdShuruck)
.TP
Wiki:   http://wiki.puppyrus.org/puppyrus/pr218/pfs3
.TP
Forum:  http://forum.puppyrus.org/index.php?board=30.0
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR mksquashfs (1),
.BR pfsexec (8),
.BR pfsrun (8),
.BR pfsactivate (8),
.BR pfsdeactivate (8),
.BR modman (8)
