.TH PFS\-UTILS\-LEGACY 8 "2026-05-06" "pfs-utils-cli" "PuppyRus PFS Module Tools"
.SH NAME
pfs\-utils\-legacy \- v4 compatibility siblings for pfs-utils
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B pfs1
[\fIFUNCTION\fR [\fIARGS\fR...]]
.br
.B pfs\-v4
[\fIFUNCTION\fR [\fIARGS\fR...]]
.B pfsload\-v4
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]
\fIFILESYSTEM\fR
.br
.B pfsunload\-v4
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]
\fIFILESYSTEM\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
These utilities are compatibility siblings retained for v4 backward
compatibility.
They implement the same command-line interface as their v5 counterparts but
use the older AUFS-only load/unload logic without the v5 layering dispatch,
OverlayFS support, or layer-map state tracking.
.PP
New scripts and tools should use the v5 utilities instead:
.BR pfs (8),
.BR pfsload (8),
and
.BR pfsunload (8).
.SS pfs1 and pfs\-v4
.B pfs1
is the v4 pfs library.
.B pfs\-v4
is installed as an alias for
.B pfs1
by the PKGBUILD.
Both provide the same function library as
.BR pfs (8)
but without v5 additions such as
.BR addlayer_dispatch ,
.BR detect_layering_mode ,
.BR write_layer_state ,
and
.BR read_layer_state .
.PP
Source them the same way as
.BR pfs (8):
.RS
.nf
\&. "$(which pfs\-v4)"
.fi
.RE
.SS pfsload\-v4
.B pfsload\-v4
is the explicit v4 load sibling.
It accepts the same options as
.BR pfsload (8)
(\fB\-u\fR, \fB\-l\fR, \fB\-n\fR, \fB\-r\fR, \fB\-\-ro\fR)
but uses the v4 AUFS layer insertion logic
.RB ( remount,add:N )
instead of the v5
.B addlayer_dispatch
path.
It does not write layer-map state, so
.B pfsunload
may not find the layer correctly; use
.B pfsunload\-v4
to unload modules loaded with
.BR pfsload\-v4 .
.SS pfsunload\-v4
.B pfsunload\-v4
is the explicit v4 unload sibling.
It accepts the same options as
.BR pfsunload (8)
(\fB\-n\fR, \fB\-s\fR, \fB\-v\fR)
but uses a simpler mount-point lookup
.RB ( /proc/mounts
grep) instead of the v5 multi-fallback resolution.
It does not read or clean up layer-map state.
.SH KEY BEHAVIORAL DIFFERENCES FROM V5
.TP
No OverlayFS support
v4 siblings always use AUFS.
On overlay-root systems they will fail.
.TP
No layer-map state
.B pfsload\-v4
does not write to
.IR /run/pfs-utils/layer-map/ ,
so
.B pfsunload
(v5) cannot find the layer path.
Always pair
.B pfsload\-v4
with
.BR pfsunload\-v4 .
.TP
Simpler mount-point resolution
.B pfsunload\-v4
uses a plain
.B /proc/mounts
grep rather than the v5 multi-fallback logic.
It may fail to find modules loaded with non-standard paths.
.TP
No erofs support
v4 siblings only handle squashfs modules.
.SH EXIT STATUS
Same as
.BR pfsload (8)
and
.BR pfsunload (8)
respectively.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR pfs (8),
.BR pfsload (8),
.BR pfsunload (8),
.BR pfs\-utils (8)
.SH AUTHORS
PuppyRus pfs-utils maintainers.
