.TH PFSACTIVATE 8 "2026-04" "pfs-utils5" "PFS module tools"
.SH NAME
pfsactivate \- mount a PFS module and expose its files via per-file symlinks
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B pfsactivate
.RB [ --persist
.IR DIR ]
.IR MODULE.pfs
.br
.B pfsactivate
.B --list
.br
.B pfsactivate
.B --help
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B pfsactivate
loop-mounts
.IR MODULE.pfs
read-only under
.I /run/pfs-utils/symlink-activations/<module>/mount
and then walks every regular file inside it. For each path
.I /<rel>
the existing target on the host is renamed to
.IB \(.pfs.org. <basename>
and replaced with a symlink pointing into the mounted module.

This is the legacy Porteus "Neko" symlink-injection model: it works on any
rootfs (aufs, overlay, ext4) without kernel support, but symlinks are
.B not
transparent (visible via
.BR readlink (1)
and
.B st_dev
checks), and a few system-critical paths are explicitly refused. On AUFS
roots prefer
.BR pfsload (8)
for system-wide kernel-level transparency. On OverlayFS roots use
.BR pfsrun (8)
for runtime execution;
.BR pfsexec (8)
is the lower-level namespace helper behind that flow.
.PP
.B pfsactivate
is marked
.B EXPERIMENTAL
in its inline help. Persistence in
.I changes=
mode is dangerous: deactivate before reboot to avoid leaving dangling
symlinks across boots.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B --list
Print one
.IR module<TAB>filecount
line for every currently activated module.
.TP
.BR --persist " " \fIDIR\fR
Use
.IR DIR
as the persistence root instead of
.IR /run .
State directory becomes
.IR DIR/pfs-utils/symlink-activations/<module>/ .
.TP
.BR -h ", " --help
Show the experimental warning and inline help.
.SH PROTECTED PATHS
The following targets are refused by the activator with exit code
.B 1 :
.IR /etc/passwd ", " /etc/shadow ", " /etc/sudoers ", " /etc/fstab ", " /etc/group
and anything under
.IR /dev , /proc , /sys , /boot .
Activation also refuses to overwrite a directory that exists on the host \(em
only files (or existing symlinks) are replaced.
.SH STATE LAYOUT
.TP
.I /run/pfs-utils/symlink-activations/<module>/mount/
read-only loop-mount of the module.
.TP
.I /run/pfs-utils/symlink-activations/<module>/state
list of activated paths, oldest first; used by
.BR pfsdeactivate (8)
to roll back in reverse order.
.TP
.I /run/pfs-utils/symlink-activations/<module>/files.list
ephemeral
.BR find (1)
output during activation; removed on success.
.TP
.IB <parent_dir>/.pfs.org. <basename>
backup of the original host file (if any), restored by
.BR pfsdeactivate (8).
.SH BEHAVIOUR ON FAILURE
On any error mid-activation
.B pfsactivate
walks
.I state
in reverse, restores original files from
.IB .pfs.org. *
backups, removes the loop-mount and the state directory. Cleanup runs from
an
.B EXIT
trap so even SIGINT/SIGTERM lead to a consistent rollback.
.SH PRIVILEGES
Must be run as root. The script exits 7 if invoked as a regular user.
.SH SUPPORTED FORMATS
The module's filesystem must be
.BR squashfs " or " erofs
(detected via
.B fs_type
from
.BR pfs (8) ).
Anything else is rejected with exit code
.B 3 .
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
activation succeeded.
.TP
.B 1
already activated, refusing to touch a protected path, backup conflict, or
help/list mode.
.TP
.B 2
module file not found.
.TP
.B 3
unsupported module filesystem.
.TP
.B 4
state directory or mount setup failed.
.TP
.B 5
file enumeration / link creation failed.
.TP
.B 7
not root.
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Activate a module:
.RS
.nf
pfsactivate /modules/extras-2026.04-sf01.pfs
.fi
.RE
.PP
List currently active modules:
.RS
.nf
pfsactivate --list
extras-2026.04-sf01    142
mytools-1.0-sf02       19
.fi
.RE
.PP
Activate with custom persistence root (test rig):
.RS
.nf
pfsactivate --persist /tmp/pfs-test /modules/x.pfs
.fi
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR pfsdeactivate (8),
.BR pfsexec (8),
.BR pfsload (8),
.BR pfsrun (8),
.BR pfs-utils (8),
.BR readlink (1)
