.TH PFSBENCH 8 "2026-05-06" "pfs-utils-cli" "PuppyRus PFS Module Tools"
.SH NAME
pfsbench \- benchmark .pfs module formats and compression algorithms
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B pfsbench
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]
[\fB\-\-source\fR \fIDIR\fR | \fIMODULE.pfs\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B pfsbench
measures build time, on-disk size, load/unload roundtrip latency, and
(optionally) cold decompression throughput for every supported squashfs and
erofs compression variant.
It then prints a table and recommends the best profile for the given payload.
.PP
When no source is specified,
.B pfsbench
synthesizes a representative payload of the requested size.
When a
.B .pfs
module is passed,
.B pfsbench
extracts it with
.BR pfsextract (8)
and benchmarks repacking in all formats.
.PP
.B pfsbench
must run as root because it calls
.BR pfsload (8)
and
.BR pfsunload (8)
for roundtrip measurements.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\-size " " \fBsmall\fR|\fBmedium\fR|\fBlarge\fR
Synthesize a payload of approximately 1 MB, 10 MB (default), or 100 MB.
.TP
.B \-\-source " " \fIDIR\fR
Use
.I DIR
as the payload instead of a synthesized one.
Overrides
.BR \-\-size .
.TP
.B \-\-runs " " \fIN\fR
Number of roundtrip samples per variant.
The median is reported.
Default is 3; minimum is 1.
.TP
.B \-\-csv " " \fIFILE\fR
Append raw measurements as CSV to
.IR FILE .
CSV schema:
.IR variant , size_kb , build_ms , roundtrip_ms , cold_read_ms , runs , source_kb .
.TP
.BR \-\-full ", " \-\-all
Run all compression variants, including those that typically lose to the
curated set.
Useful for audits.
.TP
.BR \-\-decompress ", " \-\-read
Also measure cold decompression throughput: drop page caches, then read every
file in the mounted module.
This approximates the real startup latency for image-type modules.
.TP
.B \-\-list\-compressors
Print available squashfs and erofs compressors and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-machine
Emit TSV-only stdout (7-column header + data rows).
No human table, no winners block.
.TP
.B \-\-debug
Show stderr from failing
.BR pfsload / pfsunload
calls.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Print usage and exit.
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Quick benchmark with a synthesized medium payload:
.RS
.nf
pfsbench
.fi
.RE
.PP
Benchmark repacking an existing module:
.RS
.nf
pfsbench /srv/modules/firefox.pfs \-\-decompress \-\-runs 5
.fi
.RE
.PP
Benchmark a real directory and save raw data:
.RS
.nf
pfsbench \-\-source /opt/myapp \-\-csv /tmp/bench.csv
.fi
.RE
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
Missing dependency (mkpfs, mksquashfs, pfsload, or pfsunload not found), or
must run as root.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B PFSBENCH_TMP
Override the scratch directory.
Defaults to
.I /var/tmp
or
.IR /tmp .
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /var/tmp/pfsbench.XXXXXX/
Temporary working directory; removed on exit.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR pfsinfo (8),
.BR pfsload (8),
.BR pfsunload (8),
.BR pfsextract (8),
.BR mkpfs (8),
.BR mkpfs\-erofs (8),
.BR pfs\-utils (8)
.SH AUTHORS
PuppyRus pfs-utils maintainers.
