.TH PFSDEPENDS 8 "2026-05-06" "pfs-utils5" "PuppyRus PFS Module Tools"
.SH NAME
pfsdepends \- list unresolved dependencies of pfs packages
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B pfsdepends
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]
[\fIPACKAGE\fR...]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B pfsdepends
reads
.B pfs.depends
files from mounted and installed pfs packages and reports which dependencies
are not yet satisfied by any currently mounted or installed package.
.PP
Without arguments it checks all mounted and installed packages.
With one or more
.I PACKAGE
names it checks only those packages.
.PP
With
.BR \-f ,
it reads dependency information directly from a
.B .pfs
module file without mounting it.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-m ", " \-\-mount
Check only mounted packages.
.TP
.BR \-i ", " \-\-install
Check only installed packages.
.TP
.BR \-a ", " \-\-all
Report all dependencies, including those already satisfied.
.TP
.BR \-f ", " \-\-file " " \fIFILE\fR
Read dependency information from
.I FILE
(a
.B .pfs
module) instead of the live registry.
.TP
.BR \-p ", " \-\-print\-all
When a dependency has alternatives (separated by
.BR " / " ),
print the full alternative expression instead of just the preferred variant.
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
List all unresolved dependencies across mounted and installed packages:
.RS
.nf
pfsdepends
.fi
.RE
.PP
Check a specific package:
.RS
.nf
pfsdepends myapp
.fi
.RE
.PP
Check dependencies from a module file:
.RS
.nf
pfsdepends \-f myapp.pfs
.fi
.RE
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success (unresolved dependencies are printed to stdout; an empty output means
all dependencies are satisfied).
.TP
.B 1
File not found.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /var/lib/pfs-utils/mount/<package>/pfs.depends
Dependency list for a mounted package.
.TP
.I /var/lib/pfs-utils/install/<package>/pfs.depends
Dependency list for an installed package.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR pfsinfo (8),
.BR pfsfindlibs (8),
.BR pfsload (8),
.BR pfs\-utils (8)
.SH AUTHORS
PuppyRus pfs-utils maintainers.
