.TH PFSDEACTIVATE 8 "2026-04" "pfs-utils5" "PFS module tools"
.SH NAME
pfsdeactivate \- reverse a pfsactivate symlink injection and unmount the module
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B pfsdeactivate
.RB [ --persist
.IR DIR ]
.IR MODULE.pfs
.br
.B pfsdeactivate
.B --help
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B pfsdeactivate
undoes a previous
.BR pfsactivate (8)
session for the given
.IR MODULE.pfs :
.IP \[bu] 2
walks
.I /run/pfs-utils/symlink-activations/<module>/state
in
.B reverse
order,
.IP \[bu]
removes only those symlinks that still point inside the activator's mount
directory (other symlinks are left untouched, defensive against external
edits),
.IP \[bu]
restores any
.IB <parent_dir>/.pfs.org. <basename>
backup back to its original path,
.IP \[bu]
unmounts the loop module under
.IR mount/
and removes the per-module state directory.
.PP
.B pfsdeactivate
is idempotent against partial state: leftover backups are restored even if
the corresponding symlink is already gone, and the cleanup proceeds best-effort.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR --persist " " \fIDIR\fR
Use
.IR DIR
as the persistence root (must match the
.B pfsactivate
invocation that created the state).
.TP
.BR -h ", " --help
Show inline help.
.SH PRIVILEGES
Must run as root.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
deactivation succeeded.
.TP
.B 1
help mode, too many arguments, missing
.B --persist
value, or module is not currently activated.
.TP
.B 5
deactivation finished with cleanup warnings (e.g. could not unmount the
module). Re-run after closing programs that hold open files in the
mount directory.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR pfsactivate (8),
.BR pfsexec (8),
.BR pfsload (8),
.BR pfsrun (8),
.BR pfs-utils (8)
