.TH PFSEXEC 8 "2026-04" "pfs-utils5" "PFS module tools"
.SH NAME
pfsexec \- run a command inside a private overlay namespace using a PFS module
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B pfsexec
[\fIOPTIONS\fR] [\fIMODULE.pfs\fR] [\fICOMMAND\fR [\fIARGS\fR...]]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B pfsexec
launches
.I COMMAND
in a fresh mount namespace where the lower layers of an
.BR overlayfs (5)
mount come from one or more
.B .pfs
modules merged with the host root. The upper layer is by default a
.BR tmpfs (5)
under
.IR /run/pfs-utils/exec/$$-<ns> ,
so changes are discarded on exit. Modules are loop-mounted read-only with the
appropriate filesystem type
.RB ( squashfs ", " erofs ),
chained as
.IR lowerdir=mod1:mod2:...:/ ,
and finally
.BR pivot_root (8)'ed
into so the command runs as if the merged tree was the host root.

Compared to
.BR pfsload (8) ,
.B pfsexec
does not modify the running system: when the command exits, the namespace
and the overlay disappear. Compared to
.BR pfsactivate (8) ,
.B pfsexec
gives full kernel-level transparency (no symlinks) at the cost of being
process-scoped.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR -h ", " --help
Show inline help and exit.
.TP
.BR -m " " \fIMODULE\fR
Add another module to the overlay stack. Repeatable. Can be combined with
the positional
.I MODULE.pfs
argument.
.TP
.B --rw
Use a private
.B tmpfs
upper/work pair under
.I /run/pfs-utils/exec
(default). Changes are discarded on exit.
.TP
.BR --persist " " \fIDIR\fR
Use
.IR DIR/upper " and " DIR/work
as the persistent overlay upper/work pair. Lets writes survive between
runs but is also dangerous if the overlay metadata becomes inconsistent.
.TP
.BR --bind " " \fIPATH\fR
Bind-mount host
.I PATH
inside the namespace. Repeatable. Useful for
.IR /proc , /sys , /dev , /run/user/$UID , /tmp/.X11-unix ,
.IR /run/dbus
and similar plumbing.
.SH ARGUMENTS
.TP
.I MODULE.pfs
Positional path to a PFS module. Equivalent to
.BR -m " " \fIMODULE.pfs\fR .
Either positional
.I MODULE.pfs
or at least one
.B -m
must be supplied.
.TP
.I COMMAND
Program to execute inside the namespace after pivot_root. If omitted, the
shell defined by
.B $SHELL
(or
.B /bin/bash )
is started. The command runs as the same UID/GID as
.B pfsexec
itself \(em
.B pfsexec
.B does not
drop privileges; pair with
.BR runuser (1)
or use the higher-level
.BR pfsrun (8)
launcher.
.SH FILESYSTEM SUPPORT
.B pfsexec
detects the module filesystem with
.B fs_type
from
.BR pfs (8)
which checks magic bytes for
.B squashfs
(offset 0) and
.B erofs
(offset 1024). Both endiannesses are recognised. Other formats are rejected.
.SH KERNEL REQUIREMENTS
The kernel must support
.B overlayfs
(\fIgrep overlay /proc/filesystems\fR) and
.B unshare --propagation=private
(util-linux 2.27+).
.B pfsexec
exits with a clear error if either is missing.
.SH PRIVILEGES
.B pfsexec
must be run as root because it performs
.B mount
and
.BR pivot_root .
For a friendlier experience that handles privilege drop, GUI environment
propagation, $HOME bind, etc., use
.BR pfsrun (8)
instead.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
the wrapped command exited successfully.
.TP
.B 2
argument error (missing module, unknown option, whitespace in module path).
.TP
.B 3
overlayfs not supported by the kernel.
.TP
.B 4
module not found.
.TP
.B 5
unsupported module filesystem.
.TP
.B 6
overlay or session directory creation failed.
.TP
.B 7
must run as root /
.B unshare
unavailable / pivot_root failed.
.PP
For other codes
.B pfsexec
returns whatever the wrapped command returned.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /run/pfs-utils/exec/$$-<ns>/
ephemeral session directory; cleaned up on exit.
.TP
.I /run/pfs-utils/exec/$$-<ns>/module-N
loop-mount of the N-th module.
.TP
.I /run/pfs-utils/exec/$$-<ns>/upper
.TQ
.I /run/pfs-utils/exec/$$-<ns>/work
overlay upper/work for the
.B --rw
default mode.
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Run a one-shot command:
.RS
.nf
pfsexec firefox-bin-gtk3-p-130.0.0_64-sf01.pfs /opt/firefox/firefox --new-instance
.fi
.RE
.PP
Stack two modules and run a shell:
.RS
.nf
pfsexec -m base.pfs -m extras.pfs /bin/bash
.fi
.RE
.PP
Bring in extra paths and persist writes:
.RS
.nf
pfsexec --bind /home/$USER --persist /tmp/dev-overlay devtools.pfs make build
.fi
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR pfsrun (8),
.BR pfsload (8),
.BR pfsunload (8),
.BR pfsactivate (8),
.BR pfsdeactivate (8),
.BR pfs-utils (8),
.BR overlayfs (5),
.BR unshare (1),
.BR pivot_root (8)
