.TH PFSEXTRACT 8 "2026-05-06" "pfs-utils5" "PuppyRus PFS Module Tools"
.SH NAME
pfsextract \- extract packages from a .pfs module
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B pfsextract
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]
\fIMODULE.pfs\fR
[\fIPACKAGE\fR...]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B pfsextract
unpacks a
.B .pfs
squashfs module.
.PP
For a
.I simple
module (one that contains a single package), it extracts the contents into a
directory named after the module.
.PP
For a
.I container
module (one that bundles multiple sub-packages), it extracts each sub-package
into its own
.B .pfs
file inside a directory named after the container.
Pass one or more
.I PACKAGE
names to extract only those sub-packages.
.PP
With
.BR \-i ,
the module is installed into the system root and the package metadata is
registered in the pfs-utils install registry.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-i ", " \-\-install
Install the module into the system root
.RI ( / )
and register it in the install registry at
.IR /var/lib/pfs-utils/install/ .
.TP
.BR \-o ", " \-\-out\-dir " " \fIDIR\fR
Extract into
.I DIR
instead of the default
.RI ./ <module-name>
directory.
.TP
.BR \-d ", " \-\-nopfs
Extract container sub-packages as plain directories instead of
.B .pfs
files.
.TP
.BR \-f ", " \-\-fast
Use a faster compression algorithm when re-packing sub-packages.
.TP
.B \-\-mksqfs " " \fIPARAMS\fR
Pass
.I PARAMS
verbatim to
.BR mksquashfs (1)
when re-packing.
Must appear last on the command line.
.TP
.BR \-q ", " \-\-quiet
Suppress progress output.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-progress
Suppress the
.B unsquashfs
progress bar.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Print usage and exit.
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Extract a simple module:
.RS
.nf
pfsextract myapp.pfs
.fi
.RE
.PP
Extract a container module into separate .pfs files:
.RS
.nf
pfsextract container.pfs
.fi
.RE
.PP
Extract only one sub-package from a container:
.RS
.nf
pfsextract container.pfs mypackage
.fi
.RE
.PP
Install a module into the system:
.RS
.nf
pfsextract \-i myapp.pfs
.fi
.RE
.PP
Extract as directories (no re-packing):
.RS
.nf
pfsextract \-d container.pfs
.fi
.RE
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
Source module not found, or package not in container.
.TP
.B 2
No source module specified.
.PP
Other non-zero codes propagate from
.BR unsquashfs (1)
or
.BR mkpfs (8).
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /var/lib/pfs-utils/install/
Install registry (v5 FHS location).
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR mkpfs (8),
.BR pfsinfo (8),
.BR pfsuninstall (8),
.BR pfs\-utils (8),
.BR unsquashfs (1)
.SH AUTHORS
PuppyRus pfs-utils maintainers.
