.TH PFSFIND 8 "2026-05-06" "pfs-utils-cli" "PuppyRus PFS Module Tools"
.SH NAME
pfsfind \- find a file across all AUFS layers and the changes directory
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B pfsfind
\fIFILENAME\fR
.br
.B pfsfind
\fIFILENAME\fR
.B \-\-raw
[\fIFORMAT\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B pfsfind
searches for
.I FILENAME
across all currently mounted AUFS layers and the top-level changes directory
(tmpfs).
.PP
In human-readable mode (default) it prints a table showing the layer number,
module name, sub-module name, and path for each match.
.PP
In raw mode
.RB ( \-\-raw )
it prints one line per match using a user-defined format string.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\-raw " " [\fIFORMAT\fR]
Print raw output, one line per match.
.I FORMAT
is a shell-style string that may reference the following variables:
.RS
.TP
.B $n
Layer number.
.TP
.B $bundle
Bundle mount point.
.TP
.B $module
Module name (directory/basename).
.TP
.B $submodule
Sub-module name (from pfs.files), or
.B is_not_pfs
if the module has no pfs metadata.
.TP
.B $path
Path to the file within the layer.
.RE
.PP
Default format when
.B \-\-raw
is given without a
.I FORMAT
argument:
.RS
.nf
$n $bundle $module $submodule $path
.fi
.RE
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Find a file in human-readable format:
.RS
.nf
pfsfind libssl.so.3
.fi
.RE
.PP
Find a file and print only the layer number and module:
.RS
.nf
pfsfind libssl.so.3 \-\-raw '$n $module'
.fi
.RE
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success (no matches is still exit 0; an empty output means not found).
.TP
.B 1
No filename given, or invalid option.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR aufs\-n (8),
.BR pfsfindlibs (8),
.BR pfsinfo (8),
.BR pfs\-utils (8)
.SH AUTHORS
PuppyRus pfs-utils maintainers.
