.TH PFSFINDLIBS 8 "2026-05-06" "pfs-utils-cli" "PuppyRus PFS Module Tools"
.SH NAME
pfsfindlibs \- find which pfs packages provide the dynamic libraries needed by a directory tree
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B pfsfindlibs
[\fB\-s\fR]
[\fIDIR\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B pfsfindlibs
scans
.I DIR
(default:
.BR . )
for ELF binaries, collects their dynamic library dependencies via
.BR ldd (1),
then searches the pfs-utils package registry to find which installed or mounted
packages provide each library.
.PP
Packages that provide required libraries are printed to stdout.
Libraries that are not found in any package are reported as warnings on stderr.
.PP
This is useful when building a new module: run
.B pfsfindlibs
on the module's root directory to discover which other modules it depends on.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-s ", " \-\-short
Strip version suffixes and architecture tags from package names
.RI ( \-i686 ,
.RI \-1.2.3 ,
etc.) for a cleaner output.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Print usage and exit (via invalid option handling).
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Find library dependencies for the current directory:
.RS
.nf
pfsfindlibs
.fi
.RE
.PP
Find dependencies for a module root:
.RS
.nf
pfsfindlibs /mnt/.myapp.pfs
.fi
.RE
.PP
Find dependencies with short package names:
.RS
.nf
pfsfindlibs \-s ./myapp\-root
.fi
.RE
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
Directory not found.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /var/lib/pfs-utils/mount/
Mounted package registry searched for library providers.
.TP
.I /var/lib/pfs-utils/install/
Installed package registry searched for library providers.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR pfsdepends (8),
.BR pfsfind (8),
.BR pfsinfo (8),
.BR pfs\-utils (8),
.BR ldd (1)
.SH AUTHORS
PuppyRus pfs-utils maintainers.
