.TH PFSINFO 8 "2026-05-06" "pfs-utils5" "PuppyRus PFS Module Tools"
.SH NAME
pfsinfo \- list packages inside a .pfs module or query mounted/installed modules
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B pfsinfo
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]
[\fIMODULE.pfs\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B pfsinfo
inspects
.B .pfs
modules and the pfs-utils package registry.
Without a file argument it lists packages from the mounted and installed
registries.
With a file argument it lists the sub-packages embedded in that module.
.PP
The
.B \-\-machine
flag switches all output to tab-separated values (TSV) suitable for
programmatic parsing.
This is the primary interface used by
.BR modman (8)
and other tools.
.PP
The
.B \-\-advise
flag measures the module with
.BR pfsbench (8)
and recommends the best compression profile for repacking.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-m ", " \-\-mount
List packages from currently mounted modules only.
.TP
.BR \-i ", " \-\-install
List packages from the installed registry only.
.TP
.BR \-s ", " \-\-stat
Show detailed statistics: compression algorithm, module size, uncompressed
size, compression ratio, dependencies, and sub-packages.
.TP
.BR \-d ", " \-\-delimeter " " \fICHAR\fR
Use
.I CHAR
as the field separator in output.
Default is
.BR / .
.TP
.B \-\-machine
Emit machine-readable TSV output.
.RS
.TP
With a file argument:
.I name<TAB>format<TAB>size_bytes<TAB>compression
.TP
With
.BR \-\-mount :
.I name<TAB>layer<TAB>path<TAB>desc<TAB>category<TAB>version
.TP
With
.BR \-\-install :
same 6-field shape from the installed registry.
.RE
.TP
.B \-\-advise
Measure the module with
.BR pfsbench (8)
and print repack recommendations.
Requires root.
Combine with
.B \-\-machine
for TSV output.
.TP
.B \-\-full
When used with
.BR \-\-advise ,
run all compression variants instead of the curated eight.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Print usage and exit.
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
List sub-packages in a module:
.RS
.nf
pfsinfo myapp.pfs
.fi
.RE
.PP
Show statistics for a module:
.RS
.nf
pfsinfo \-s myapp.pfs
.fi
.RE
.PP
List all mounted modules in machine-readable format:
.RS
.nf
pfsinfo \-\-machine \-\-mount
.fi
.RE
.PP
Get module metadata as TSV:
.RS
.nf
pfsinfo \-\-machine myapp.pfs
.fi
.RE
.PP
Get repack advice:
.RS
.nf
pfsinfo \-\-advise myapp.pfs
.fi
.RE
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
File not found, or
.B \-\-machine
used without a required argument.
.TP
.B 2
.B \-\-advise
requires a module file.
.TP
.B 3
.B \-\-advise
must run as root.
.TP
.B 4
.B pfsbench
not found.
.TP
.B 5
.B pfsbench
failed.
.TP
.B 6
.B pfsbench
produced no CSV data.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /var/lib/pfs-utils/mount/
Runtime mount registry (v5 FHS location).
.TP
.I /var/lib/pfs-utils/install/
Installed package registry (v5 FHS location).
.TP
.I /etc/packages/install/
Legacy install registry (v4 location, still searched as fallback).
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR pfsbench (8),
.BR pfsdepends (8),
.BR pfsload (8),
.BR pfsunload (8),
.BR pfs\-utils (8)
.SH AUTHORS
PuppyRus pfs-utils maintainers.
