.TH PFSLOAD 8 "2026-05-06" "pfs-utils-cli" "PuppyRus PFS Module Tools"
.SH NAME
pfsload \- attach a .pfs module to a running AUFS root
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B pfsload
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]
\fIFILESYSTEM\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B pfsload
mounts a
.B .pfs
squashfs module (or an erofs image, directory, or block device) and adds it
as a layer to the running AUFS root filesystem.
.PP
AUFS-only: system-wide hot attach/detach is not supported on OverlayFS roots;
use
.BR pfsrun (8)
for OverlayFS runtime execution.
.PP
The module is loop-mounted read-only at
.IR /mnt/.<basename> ,
then inserted into the AUFS layer stack.
After a successful load,
.B pfsload
updates system caches (icon themes, fonts, shared libraries) and runs any
.B runpfsload*
hook scripts found alongside the utility.
.PP
Whitespace in the module path is rejected with exit code 2.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-u ", " \-\-upper
Mount the module as the topmost (upper) layer, so its files take precedence
over all lower layers.
This is the default.
.TP
.BR \-l ", " \-\-lower
Mount the module as the lowest (append) layer, below all existing layers.
.TP
.BR \-r ", " \-\-toram
Copy the module to a RAM disk (tmpfs) before loading.
Useful for modules on slow media.
Requires enough free RAM.
.TP
.BR \-n ", " \-\-no\-update
Skip cache updates after loading.
.TP
.B \-\-ro ", " \-\-read\-only
Mount the module read-only even when the source is a directory or block device.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Print usage and exit.
.SH ARGUMENTS
.TP
.I FILESYSTEM
Path to a
.B .pfs
squashfs file, an erofs image, a directory, or a block device.
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Load a module into the upper AUFS layer:
.RS
.nf
pfsload /srv/modules/firefox.pfs
.fi
.RE
.PP
Load a module into RAM first:
.RS
.nf
pfsload \-r /mnt/usb/myapp.pfs
.fi
.RE
.PP
Load a directory as a lower layer:
.RS
.nf
pfsload \-l /srv/extra\-files
.fi
.RE
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
Usage error (no file specified).
.TP
.B 2
Whitespace in module path, or module not found.
.TP
.B 3
Unknown filesystem type.
.TP
.B 4
Kernel does not support PFS (squashfs/aufs missing).
.TP
.B 5
Unsupported filesystem type for directory source.
.TP
.B 6
Module already mounted.
.TP
.B 7
No free loop device found.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B PFS_LAYERING
When set to
.B aufs
or
.BR overlay ,
overrides automatic layering detection. The overlay value does not make
.B pfsload
perform system-wide OverlayFS hot attach; use
.BR pfsrun (8)
instead.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /mnt/.<basename>
Mount point created for the module.
.TP
.I /run/pfs-utils/layer-map/<basename>.layer
State file recording the layering mode and layer path for later unload.
.TP
.I /run/pfs-utils/ram/
RAM disk directory used by
.BR \-\-toram .
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR pfsunload (8),
.BR pfsrun (8),
.BR pfsinfo (8),
.BR pfsload\-v4 (8),
.BR pfs\-utils (8)
.SH AUTHORS
PuppyRus pfs-utils maintainers.
