.TH PFSMIGRATE\-INSTALL 8 "2026-05-06" "pfs-utils-cli" "PuppyRus PFS Module Tools"
.SH NAME
pfsmigrate\-install \- migrate the legacy pfs install registry to the FHS location
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B pfsmigrate\-install
[\fB\-\-dry\-run\fR]
[\fB\-\-force\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B pfsmigrate\-install
moves package entries from the legacy install registry at
.I /etc/packages/install
to the v5 FHS location at
.IR /var/lib/pfs-utils/install .
.PP
The operation is idempotent: running it multiple times is safe.
Entries that already exist at the destination are skipped unless
.B \-\-force
is given.
.PP
This tool is part of the v5 Phase 0 migration path.
Run it once after upgrading from pfs-utils v4 to v5 to ensure the install
registry is in the correct location.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\-dry\-run
Show what would be moved without touching the disk.
.TP
.B \-\-force
Overwrite existing entries at the destination.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Print usage and exit.
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Preview the migration:
.RS
.nf
pfsmigrate\-install \-\-dry\-run
.fi
.RE
.PP
Run the migration:
.RS
.nf
pfsmigrate\-install
.fi
.RE
.PP
Force overwrite of existing entries:
.RS
.nf
pfsmigrate\-install \-\-force
.fi
.RE
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success (including the case where the source directory does not exist).
.TP
.B 1
Must run as root, or a move operation failed.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B PFSDIR_INSTALL_LEGACY
Override the legacy source path.
Default:
.IR /etc/packages/install .
.TP
.B PFSDIR_INSTALL_NEW
Override the destination path.
Default:
.IR /var/lib/pfs-utils/install .
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/packages/install/
Legacy v4 install registry (source).
.TP
.I /var/lib/pfs-utils/install/
v5 FHS install registry (destination).
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR pfsextract (8),
.BR pfsuninstall (8),
.BR pfsinfo (8),
.BR pfs\-utils (8)
.SH AUTHORS
PuppyRus pfs-utils maintainers.
