.TH PFSRUN 8 "2026-04" "pfs-utils5" "PFS module tools"
.SH NAME
pfsrun \- friendly launcher for applications from PFS modules
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B pfsrun
[\fIOPTIONS\fR] \fIMODULE.pfs\fR [\fICOMMAND\fR [\fIARGS\fR...]]
.br
.B pfsrun
[\fIOPTIONS\fR] \fB-m\fR \fIMOD1.pfs\fR [\fB-m\fR \fIMOD2.pfs\fR ...] [\fB--\fR \fICOMMAND\fR [\fIARGS\fR...]]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B pfsrun
wraps
.BR pfsexec (8)
with sane defaults so an unprivileged user can launch a GUI application
that lives inside a
.B .pfs
(squashfs / erofs) module without remembering bind paths,
privilege drops, or environment passing.

When invoked without
.B sudo
the script self-elevates via
.BR sudo (8)
preserving session variables.
Inside the namespace it drops privileges back to the invoking
user via
.BR runuser (1)
so the process matches the owner of
.IR /run/user/$UID/wayland-0 ,
\(em this is the easiest way to satisfy Mozilla's "running as root in a
regular user's session is not supported" check and similar guards in other
toolkits.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR -h ", " --help
Show inline help with all options and a few examples.
.TP
.BR -m " " \fIMODULE\fR
Add another module to the overlay stack. Repeatable. The first module's
basename is also used for the auto\-detected binary.
.TP
.BR --bind " " \fIPATH\fR
Extra bind mount injected into the namespace, on top of the GUI defaults.
Repeatable.
.TP
.BR --exec " " \fIPATH\fR
Override the auto\-detected main binary. Useful when the module ships
several launchers or the heuristic picks the wrong one.
.TP
.B --shell
Drop into an interactive shell inside the namespace. With a TTY a real
.BR bash (1)
session is started with a
.B (pfsrun)
PS1 marker; on a pipe / heredoc a non\-interactive shell is used so
scripted probing works (\fBpfsrun --shell module.pfs <<<'ls /opt'\fR).
.TP
.BR --user " " \fIUSER\fR
Drop privileges to this user. Defaults to
.B $SUDO_USER
when self\-elevated.
.TP
.B --root
Run as root inside the namespace. The GUI session of the invoking user
(\fB$SUDO_UID\fR) is still bound and
.B XDG_RUNTIME_DIR
is set accordingly so root processes can reach the user's Wayland/Xorg
display.
.TP
.B --no-gui
Skip
.IR /proc , /sys , /dev , /run/user/UID ,
.IR /tmp/.X11-unix ,
.I /run/dbus
binds and Wayland/X11 environment variables. Useful for headless
\fIcommand\fR runs.
.TP
.B --no-home
Do not bind the target user's
.B $HOME
into the namespace. By default
.I /home/USER
is bound so the application's profile
.RI ( ~/.mozilla ", " ~/.config ", " ~/.cache )
persists between runs. Use this for sandboxed, single\-shot launches.
.TP
.BR --persist " " \fIDIR\fR
Forwarded to
.BR pfsexec (8) :
.I DIR/upper
and
.I DIR/work
are reused as the overlay upper/work pair, so namespace\-local writes
also persist between runs.
.TP
.BR -v ", " --verbose
Print the resolved
.B pfsexec
argv to stderr right before exec. Handy for debugging.
.TP
.B --
End of options. Following arguments are treated as flags for the
auto\-detected binary, never as a literal command.
.SH AUTO-DISCOVERY
When no
.IR COMMAND ,
.B --exec
or
.B --shell
is given,
.B pfsrun
derives a binary name from the first module's basename:
.IP \[bu] 2
strip trailing
.I -sfNN
revision suffix
.IP \[bu]
strip a trailing version block
.RI ( -130.0.0_64 ", " -3.11_64 ", " -2601 )
.IP \[bu]
strip the
.I -p
"porteus" tag
.IP \[bu]
progressively trim trailing
.IR -segment s
to build fallback candidates
.PP
Each candidate is searched inside the module at:
.IP
.IR /usr/bin/<name> ", " /opt/<name>/<name> ", " /opt/<name>/<name>-bin
.PP
If nothing matches,
.B pfsrun
drops the user into an interactive shell instead of failing, with a
hint to inspect
.B /usr/bin
and
.B /opt
manually.
.PP
Examples of the heuristic:
.RS
.nf
firefox-bin-gtk3-p-130.0.0_64-sf01.pfs  -> /usr/bin/firefox-bin-gtk3
                                           fallback /opt/firefox/firefox
netsurf-gtk3-p-3.11_64-sf03.pfs         -> /usr/bin/netsurf-gtk3
gparted-2601-sf02.pfs                   -> /usr/bin/gparted
.fi
.RE
.SH ARGUMENT HANDLING
The arguments after the module are interpreted by a small heuristic:
.IP \[bu] 2
First argument starts with
.B -
=> auto\-detect, args go to the binary
.RI ( "pfsrun firefox.pfs --new-instance" ).
.IP \[bu]
First argument does not start with
.B -
=> treat the whole tail as a literal command line, no auto\-detect
.RI ( "pfsrun firefox.pfs /bin/echo hi" ).
.IP \[bu]
Explicit
.B --
forces auto\-detect regardless of how the next token looks
.RI ( "pfsrun module.pfs -- subcommand" ).
.SH GUI ENVIRONMENT
With
.B --no-gui
absent (the default)
.B pfsrun
binds the host\-side desktop plumbing into the namespace and
propagates the corresponding env vars:
.IP \[bu] 2
.I /proc , /sys , /dev
\(em without these Firefox cannot resolve
.B /proc/self/exe
or open DRI nodes.
.IP \[bu]
.I /run/user/UID
\(em Wayland socket
.RB ( wayland-0 ),
PulseAudio, user DBus.
.IP \[bu]
.I /tmp/.X11-unix
and
.B XAUTHORITY
\(em Xorg fallback.
.IP \[bu]
.I /run/dbus
\(em system DBus, used by NetworkManager, polkit, UDisks, etc.
.IP \[bu]
.B WAYLAND_DISPLAY ", " DISPLAY ", " XDG_SESSION_TYPE ", " XDG_RUNTIME_DIR
\(em forwarded from the invoking session.
.IP \[bu]
.B MOZ_ENABLE_WAYLAND=1 ", " GDK_BACKEND=wayland ", " QT_QPA_PLATFORM=wayland
\(em set when a Wayland socket is detected.
.PP
On top of that, unless
.B --no-home
is specified, the target user's
.B $HOME
is bind\-mounted so application profiles persist on the host.
.SH KNOWN LIMITATIONS
.SS pkexec / polkit applications
Apps that escalate via
.BR pkexec (1)
\(em e.g.
.BR gparted ,
.B nm-connection-editor
\(em fail with
.RS
.nf
Error executing command as another user: No authentication agent found.
.fi
.RE
The polkit authentication agent runs in the user's host session; from
inside the namespace it is not reachable through the bus the way the
agent expects. Workarounds:
.IP \[bu] 2
Run with
.B --root
so no further escalation is needed.
.B pfsrun
will still bind the desktop session of the invoking user.
.IP \[bu]
Pre\-authenticate before launching:
\fBsudo pfsrun --root module.pfs ...\fR avoids
.B pkexec
entirely.
.SS Hardware-accelerated graphics
Renderers expecting full
.BR libdrm /Mesa/Vulkan plumbing may print
.IR libEGL ,
.IR ZINK ,
or
.I dri2
warnings and fall back to software. The DRI render nodes are exposed
through the
.I /dev
bind, but vendor user\-space (firmware blobs, GBM backends) might still
mismatch with the host. Add the relevant pfs-modules
.RI ( firmware-* ", " 060-vulkan-radeon , ...)
to the overlay or accept software rendering.
.SS Multiple parallel pfsrun invocations
Each invocation creates a fresh overlay session. Two
.B pfsrun
runs against the same module do not share
.I /run
state, but they do share the bound
.B $HOME ,
so writes to the user's profile go through to the host filesystem.
.SS Wayland sandboxing under wlroots
.B labwc
and other wlroots compositors trust any client that can connect to
.IR wayland-0 .
A bound socket plus matching UID is therefore enough; XDG portals
.RI ( xdg-desktop-portal-* )
are not required for basic input/clipboard. Apps that explicitly want
portals will need extra binds.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B SUDO_USER ", " SUDO_UID
Used to determine the GUI session UID and the privilege drop target.
.TP
.B WAYLAND_DISPLAY ", " DISPLAY ", " XAUTHORITY ", " XDG_RUNTIME_DIR ", " XDG_SESSION_TYPE ", " LANG ", " LC_ALL
Forwarded into the namespace verbatim when set.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /usr/bin/pfsrun
the script itself.
.TP
.I /usr/bin/pfsexec
the lower\-level overlay launcher used internally.
.TP
.I /run/pfs-utils/exec/<pid>-<ns>/
ephemeral session directory for a single
.B pfsexec
run; cleaned up on exit.
.TP
.I /usr/share/applications/pfsrun.desktop
desktop entry that registers
.B pfsrun
as a handler for
.IR application/x-pfs-module .
.TP
.I /usr/share/mime/packages/pfs-utils.xml
MIME definition for
.B *.pfs
modules. Run
.B update-mime-database /usr/share/mime
once after install if the file manager does not pick it up.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
the in\-namespace command exited successfully.
.TP
.B 2
argument parsing error.
.TP
.B 3
auto\-detect failed and
.B --shell
fallback could not be started.
.TP
.B 7
sudo or
.B pfsexec
plumbing problem (must run as root, unshare unavailable, ...).
.PP
For other codes,
.B pfsrun
returns whatever the wrapped command returned.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR pfsexec (8),
.BR pfsload (8),
.BR pfsunload (8),
.BR pfsactivate (8),
.BR pfsdeactivate (8),
.BR pfs-utils (8),
.BR runuser (1),
.BR sudo (8)
