.TH PFSREBUILD 8 "2026-05-06" "pfs-utils5" "PuppyRus PFS Module Tools"
.SH NAME
pfsrebuild \- rebuild an AUFS-loaded or installed pfs package into a new module
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B pfsrebuild
\fIPACKAGE\fR
[\fImkpfs-options\fR...]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B pfsrebuild
reconstructs a
.B .pfs
module from a package that is currently loaded through AUFS or installed in
the pfs-utils registry.
.PP
AUFS-only: rebuilding from the running root requires a system-wide AUFS-loaded
module. OverlayFS roots cannot provide that hot-loaded root view; use
.BR mkpfs (8),
.BR chroot2pfs (8),
or
.BR pfsrun (8)
for OverlayFS build or private-runtime workflows.
.PP
It locates the package's
.B pfs.files
manifest, copies the listed files into a temporary build directory, then calls
.BR mkpfs (8)
to compress the result into a new
.B .pfs
file in the current directory.
.PP
For container modules (those that bundle multiple sub-packages),
.B pfsrebuild
rebuilds each sub-package individually and then merges them back into a
container.
.PP
Any extra arguments after
.I PACKAGE
are passed directly to
.BR mkpfs (8).
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Print usage and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-nopfs
Build the staging directory but do not compress it into a
.B .pfs
file.
Useful for inspecting the reconstructed tree before committing.
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Rebuild an AUFS-loaded package:
.RS
.nf
pfsrebuild myapp
.fi
.RE
.PP
Rebuild with faster compression:
.RS
.nf
pfsrebuild myapp \-f
.fi
.RE
.PP
Rebuild and inspect the staging directory without compressing:
.RS
.nf
pfsrebuild myapp \-\-nopfs
.fi
.RE
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
Usage error.
.TP
.B 4
Package not found in any registry.
.PP
Other non-zero codes propagate from
.BR mkpfs (8).
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ./build_<package>/<package>/
Temporary staging directory; removed after successful compression.
.TP
.I /var/lib/pfs-utils/mount/<package>/pfs.files
File manifest for a mounted package.
.TP
.I /var/lib/pfs-utils/install/<package>/pfs.files
File manifest for an installed package.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR mkpfs (8),
.BR chroot2pfs (8),
.BR pfsextract (8),
.BR pfsinfo (8),
.BR pfsrun (8),
.BR pfs\-utils (8)
.SH AUTHORS
PuppyRus pfs-utils maintainers.
