.TH PFSUNINSTALL 8 "2026-05-06" "pfs-utils-cli" "PuppyRus PFS Module Tools"
.SH NAME
pfsuninstall \- remove an installed pfs package from the system
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B pfsuninstall
\fIPACKAGE\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B pfsuninstall
removes a package that was previously installed with
.BR "pfsextract \-i" .
It reads the package's
.B pfs.files
manifest from the install registry, deletes each listed file that is not also
owned by another installed or mounted package, and removes the registry entry.
.PP
After removing files,
.B pfsuninstall
triggers background cache updates:
.BR depmod (8)
if kernel modules were removed,
.BR ldconfig (8)
if shared libraries were removed, and
.BR glib\-compile\-schemas (1)
if GLib schemas were removed.
.PP
For container modules,
.B pfsuninstall
recursively uninstalls each sub-package.
.SH ARGUMENTS
.TP
.I PACKAGE
Package name or path to a
.B .pfs
file.
The
.B .pfs
extension is stripped automatically.
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Uninstall a package by name:
.RS
.nf
pfsuninstall myapp
.fi
.RE
.PP
Uninstall using the module file path:
.RS
.nf
pfsuninstall /srv/modules/myapp.pfs
.fi
.RE
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
Package not installed, or uninstall already in progress.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /var/lib/pfs-utils/install/<package>/pfs.files
File manifest read during uninstall.
.TP
.I /etc/packages/install/<package>/
Legacy v4 install location, also cleaned up when present.
.TP
.I /tmp/.pfs/uninstall/<package>/
Lock directory preventing concurrent uninstalls of the same package.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR pfsextract (8),
.BR pfsinfo (8),
.BR pfsrebuild (8),
.BR pfs\-utils (8)
.SH AUTHORS
PuppyRus pfs-utils maintainers.
