.TH PFSUNLOAD 8 "2026-05-06" "pfs-utils5" "PuppyRus PFS Module Tools"
.SH NAME
pfsunload \- detach a .pfs module from a running AUFS root
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B pfsunload
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]
\fIFILESYSTEM\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B pfsunload
removes a previously loaded
.B .pfs
module from the running AUFS root filesystem.
It reverses the operation performed by
.BR pfsload (8):
the module is removed from the AUFS layer stack, the loop device is released,
and the mount point is cleaned up.
.PP
AUFS-only: system-wide hot attach/detach is not supported on OverlayFS roots;
use
.BR pfsrun (8)
for OverlayFS runtime execution.
.PP
After a successful unload,
.B pfsunload
updates system caches and runs any
.B runpfsunload*
hook scripts found alongside the utility.
.PP
If the module was loaded into RAM with
.BR pfsload\ \-r ,
the RAM copy is freed unless
.B \-\-saveram
is given.
.PP
Whitespace in the module path is rejected with exit code 2.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-n ", " \-\-no\-update
Skip cache updates after unloading.
.TP
.BR \-s ", " \-\-saveram
Do not free the RAM copy of the module after unloading.
.TP
.B \-v
Verbose output: list open files from the module when unloading fails.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Print usage and exit.
.SH ARGUMENTS
.TP
.I FILESYSTEM
Path or name of the module to unload.
Accepts the original file path, the basename, or the basename without the
.B .pfs
extension.
.B pfsunload
resolves the mount point automatically.
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Unload a module by path:
.RS
.nf
pfsunload /srv/modules/firefox.pfs
.fi
.RE
.PP
Unload by name only:
.RS
.nf
pfsunload firefox.pfs
.fi
.RE
.PP
Unload without freeing the RAM copy:
.RS
.nf
pfsunload \-s myapp.pfs
.fi
.RE
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 2
Whitespace in module path.
.TP
.B 3
Kernel does not support PFS.
.TP
.B 22
Module is not currently mounted.
.PP
Other non-zero codes indicate AUFS or unmount errors.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B PFS_LAYERING
When set to
.B aufs
or
.BR overlay ,
overrides automatic layering detection. The overlay value does not make
.B pfsunload
perform system-wide OverlayFS hot detach; use
.BR pfsrun (8)
instead.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /mnt/.<basename>
Primary mount point removed on unload.
.TP
.I /run/bundles/.<basename>
Secondary bundle mount point, also cleaned up when present.
.TP
.I /run/pfs-utils/layer-map/<basename>.layer
State file read to determine the correct layer path; removed on success.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR pfsload (8),
.BR pfsrun (8),
.BR pfsinfo (8),
.BR pfsunload\-v4 (8),
.BR pfs\-utils (8)
.SH AUTHORS
PuppyRus pfs-utils maintainers.
