.TH SELFTEST 8 "2026-05-06" "pfs-utils5" "PuppyRus PFS Module Tools"
.SH NAME
selftest \- run the pfs-utils built-in self-test suite
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B selftest
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B selftest
exercises the core pfs-utils utilities on the running system.
It creates temporary test modules, loads and unloads them, verifies
filesystem type detection, checks v5 feature flags, and runs regression
tests for known bug fixes.
.PP
The test suite is organized into four waves:
.TP
.B Legacy suite
Tests for
.BR mkpfs ,
.BR pfsextract ,
.BR pfsinfo ,
.BR mountfile ,
.BR pfsload ,
.BR pfsunload ,
and
.BR pfsrebuild .
.TP
.B v5 Phase 0
Tests for erofs support, initrd detection, layering mode dispatch,
v4 sibling presence, deprecation warning behavior, machine-readable output,
and the FHS install registry.
.TP
.B Wave A (regression)
Tests for shell-injection rejection, double-load prevention, error output
routing, and layer-map cleanup.
.TP
.B Wave B (edge cases)
Tests for space rejection, Unicode filenames, empty source handling, and
load/unload roundtrip idempotency.
.TP
.B Wave C (systemd + perf)
Tests for the
.B modman\-load@.service
template and a performance gate ensuring v5 load/unload is within 2x of v4.
.PP
.B selftest
must run as root.
All temporary files are created in the current directory and cleaned up on
exit.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
All tests passed (or skipped).
.TP
.B 1
A test failed and the suite was aborted.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR pfsload (8),
.BR pfsunload (8),
.BR mkpfs (8),
.BR pfsextract (8),
.BR pfs\-utils (8)
.SH AUTHORS
PuppyRus pfs-utils maintainers.
